notes:

1. ablation on lung and PBMC

2. harmoney + cluster

on harmoney then cluster:

what is our claim: scproto get batch removed space - and correct its over correction by modifying latent space - for exmaple 2 rare cells may get absorbed to dense states - scproto correct this
so now encoder know if a specific pattern of a rare state happeneded where it shoudl put the cell in the latent space
how we show this? we used rare cells in each batch as a way to show this

we used f1 as a measure how well we are classifying rare cells - also homogeienity as contues measure of checking how well rare cells are beign grouped together

for harmoney: how does it work?
it does kmeans on pca - rare cell types within one batch even may not be assigned to same cluster - i am not sure but i feel this ma cuase probelm - i can say that in harmoney - cells of same state are assumed to have same batch effect vector am i correct?
then it assign each cell to some cluster but in a ways so that maximize batch mixing for each cluster - this may not be true - if a cell state not exist in a batch be problematic
then it move cell embeddings so that batch effect removes 

i think if we do harmoney using same k as number of proto - and do batch correct - one good thing is that as its linear - i think arbf on and then leiden for exmaple
cells of same batch are really good - becasue its like we do leiden on pca 
but there is a chance of mixing worng cells across batches - specialy for rare cell types - i dont know if it can match corret rare cell types across batches or not? why yes and why not?

i think the worst things would happened if a state not exist in one batch - in that case we think scproto shoud do better - lets check this

what we have - scproto is mostly same with harmonet if we do leiden or seacell [better in some cases] [maybe we can work on this and say thats the case where we think scproto has advnatge]
hen also report modulairyt and mention we considered as gt [maybe report some test set would be better - say becaseu ct labels may come from harmoeny itself - so if we consider the gt are on affinity we compare modualirty instead of ct labels]
we can also bring 2 other metrics showing scproto is better than harmoney - 1: eval on arbf on latent - no clustering 2: the metric where eval how well we are matching rare ct across batches




3. On this matter, hyperparameter sweeps or details on hyperparameter tuning (which were also mentioned as part of this concern) are still missing.
lambda [comm - nssoc - usage - proto recon]
epsilon [if tuned per dataset maybe e can ignore and do nt sweep]? alpha?
what else? what is their value mentioedn in the paper? what range for each make sesne?
k [done]
what else?

4. what is combat - mention it
--

my answer draft

say thanks [use whatever usualy peoople start with in comment]
include result on lung and pbmc 
include results on sweep

include harmeny results - along with signifcance results [use best rpactcie how people usualy report this]
but the rebuttal cites "mixed results, ahead of scProto on some datasets, behind in others": say in our prevous loss we mistakenely applied harmey in pca with numebr of dim 50 - however scprot latent spca dim was 8
for more fair comparison we did harmneiy on same 8 dim and now scproto is better
we think scproto works better than hamrney becasue [mention facts in harmoeny notes]

[include combat results]

